---
layout: newsletter
title: "On Oct. 19-21, Join our First Intergenerational Teach-In"
category: "Volume 4"
image:
    file: /assets/img/vol-4-issue-14-header.jpg
    alt: "Seven painted abstract angular yellow pink and blue shapes of varying size, converging to the right of the middle of the canvas"
    caption: ""
    source_link: null
    half_width: false
preview: "Join us for three days of intergenerational learning and skillshare on tech, labor, and organizing"
---

**What do workers today need to learn from elders to guide future organizing?**

Workers in tech are and have always been historical actors, but learning from history in a fast-paced industry is challenging – even the past few years can feel inaccessible. We hope to change that with this first intergenerational teach-in event. On October 19-21, we’re bringing together elder and younger workers in and around tech to share perspectives and learn skills for organizing, solidarity, and healing. By situating worker perspectives and collective actions in history, we’ll all be better equipped to face the demands of today’s workplaces and organize for the future ahead.

**[Register to attend the teach-in](https://twcteachin.org)**
<br>

<!-- DO NOT remove the excerpt tag -->
<!--excerpt-->
<!-- remaining content goes below here -->

<!-- DO NOT remove the header image -->
{% include post_image.html %}

**What is it?**<br>
This teach-in is an intergenerational learning event. It consists of sessions including oral history, skillshare and training, games, connections among workers, and more. We hope this will be the first of many events.

**Who is it for?**<br>
This event is for elder and younger workers in and around tech, as well as allies in labor and community organizations.

**When and where is it?**<br>
The teach-in takes place over 2.5 days, Wednesday, October 19 at 9am PST to Friday, October 21 at 12pm. We’re hosting the event online via Zoom.

**Where can I learn more?**<br>
Read about our vision and see the tentative program at [the teach-in website](https://twcteachin.org).

**How can I help?**<br>
Donate to [our mutual aid event fund](https://opencollective.com/twc-teachin).
