---
layout: newsletter
title: "Issue 9: Tech Work Under the Pandemic - Cleaner and App Co-Owner"
category: "Volume 3"
image:
    file: /assets/img/vol-3-issue-9-header.jpg
    alt: "Photo of Marve with her coworkers and a quote, All this has taught us that we can aspire to have a different quality of life and to be able to live in a different way."
    caption: "Marve and other domestic workers grew their cooperative advantages under COVID."
    source_link: https://points.datasociety.net/tech-work-under-the-pandemic-cleaner-and-app-co-owner-5878099e5804
    half_width: false
preview: "The third installment in our peer interview series with Marve Romero"
---

Today, TWC volunteer Ana Ulin interviews Marve Romero, a domestic worker and cleaning app [Up & Go](https://www.upandgo.coop/) co-owner. Marve is a Latina that enjoys working in community. She is a member of the East Harlem Cleaning Cooperative, which belongs to the larger Up & Go cooperative. During the pandemic, Marve participates in workshops, meetings, and training online. She and fellow worker-owners also added new cleaning services, recruited more workers, & got featured in the New York Times. She always seeks to deepen her cooperativist spirit.

Hoy, Ana Ulin de TWC entrevista a Marve Romero, una trabajadora doméstica y co-dueña de [Up & Go](https://www.upandgo.coop/). Marve es una mujer Latina que disfruta del trabajo en comunidad. Es miembra de la Cooperativa East Harlem Cleaning, la cual pertenece a la membresía de Up & Go, que es también una cooperativa. Durante Covid, participa en talleres, reuniones y entrenamientos vía internet. Marve y sus compañerxs expandieron sus servicios y su membresía—y aparecieron en el New York Times. Busca siempre desarrollar su espíritu cooperativista.

<!-- DO NOT remove the excerpt tag -->
<!--excerpt-->
<!-- remaining content goes below here -->

<!-- DO NOT remove the header image -->
{% include post_image.html %}

## The Worker's Perspective

_By TWC and Data & Society_

Para leer en español, desplazarse hacia abajo.

**Ana Ulin**: Tell me about yourself. Where are you from? What was your background before Up & Go?

**Marve Romero**: My name is Maria Veronica Romero Hernandez, “Marve.” I’m 48, and I’ve lived in New York for 14 years. I’m from Mexico; I was born in Veracruz, but I grew up in Mexico City, and later in Mexico State. In Mexico, I was a catalog shoe salesperson.

I came to San Francisco in ’95, where my son was born. After two years, I brought my son back to Mexico to be near family. I didn’t think I would come back to the US, but the situation in Mexico was difficult. The US seemed like it would allow a more flexible work schedule and my ex-husband had family in New York. We needed money, so I worked in a laundromat despite my husband wanting me to focus on the child.

**Ana**: How did you start working with Up & Go?

**Marve**: Seven months after arriving here, I was suffering psychological violence. In Mexico it would be nothing: they beat your grandmother, they aren’t beating you, just take it. My ex-husband was angry because I started working in the laundromat, part-time. He watched me. And one day he told me that I had to go, and I had to leave the house.

I have a brother here, and he supported me. I was living with my son for 8 years in a basement. In court, I went to ask for custody, but they told me that psychological violence was difficult to prove, so I stayed quiet.

I worked in a lawyer’s office. The lawyer asked me about my situation and I explained: I came from Mexico, my son was born here. He began to review my case, he told me that I had suffered domestic violence. We went to court, and he helped me with the paperwork.

Later, at a dance event, I met the promoters of VIP, an organization for the prevention of domestic violence. I called them and they helped me.

After I was done with my time at VIP, they told us that there was going to be an informational meeting to become part of a cooperative. They taught us to do the paperwork and to incorporate a cooperative, East Harlem Cleaning, with which we joined the Brightly cleaning cooperative franchise. As a Brightly cooperative, we had an approval period to join Up & Go. We came into Up & Go when there were three cooperatives.

**Ana**: Tell me about the structure of Up & Go.

**Marve**: It is a cooperative of cleaning cooperatives. The base is the members. In our cooperative, there are 12 members. We make decisions and create policies.

Up & Go has everything technologically structured, it is an app. We work with other cooperatives, which is one of the seven principles of cooperativism.

Each cooperative sends two representatives and has its own policy for choosing representatives for Up & Go. Every three weeks we have Up & Go membership meetings. There is a board of directors, that consists of three representatives from three cooperatives, and two external people.

We have the support of CFL, the Center for Family Life. They support us with technology, marketing, funds, and also with a place to meet.

**Ana**: You mentioned that you are part of Brightly, which in turn belongs to Up & Go. How does Brightly work?

**Marve**: Brightly is a franchise. It has its own brand and a standard of quality of services. And it is also a cooperative.

We have representatives who meet to develop changes. Sometimes a vote is needed for a decision. Each cooperative elects its representatives, often based on availability.

**Ana**: You are not only worker-owners, but also businesswomen. You founded a company together. That requires good personal relationships and a lot of trust. How did you create those relationships?

**Marve**: With the support of CFL, who are cooperative developers. We met at a weekend retreat.

You arrive at a place with new people, with some idea that it is a business where you are going to be an owner and a worker at the same time, but nothing more. We began to get to know each other, our colleagues, and ourselves.

There are also men in all this, but there are many women, which is something very positive for us, so we can say, Ok, we feel comfortable, we can do it.

We had moments where I said, I can’t take it anymore, it’s too long, when are we going to start working? Now I realize all that we have walked and all that we have learned.

It’s like going to school. It has opened us up to different things, to knowing ourselves, more about personal relationships, technology, marketing, accounting, many things that we did not know anything about as employees.

That has also been a challenge, to change that mindset. You are an employee, but you are also the owner and you have the power to decide.

And we continue to get to know ourselves. Although we love each other very much, those of us who currently remain have persisted, because it is also a matter of persistence.

I have learned from our guides, from the women who have been teaching us, and from my peers.

It isn’t about someone winning, it’s about us learning, being able to fit together. It takes us out of our comfort zone. It changes our mindset, shows us that you are in control of this, but you also have this responsibility.

It is something that I always wanted. Before I thought about starting a cleaning company. But now I know it’s not just let’s get together and let’s go. If we don’t have a structure, policies, a way of running things, it will easily dissolve, because we don’t have the tools.

The universe put me where I wanted to be.

**Ana**: How is working for Up & Go, compared to the work you did before?

**Marve**: It is a fairer salary. Before, sometimes customers wouldn’t want to pay me and would say, there is another person who charges me less. Then I would have to lower the price. There is a lot of abuse and a lot of wage theft. Working at Up & Go is an assurance that you are working for what’s fair.

On your own, you get a client and you go clean their house for a year and suddenly they tell you I’m moving next week and you are left with nothing. Sometimes I had a lot of work and sometimes I had nothing. The difference with working at Up & Go is that we are doing marketing, looking for promotion, advertising.

If a client, when I was working on my own, canceled overnight, I had nothing to support me. At Up & Go there are policies for them, and there are policies for us. If you cancel within so many hours you will have to pay a percentage. We find in Up & Go our rights as workers, when before we might have believed that as domestic workers we don’t have them.

Working at Up & Go gives me the advantage of being able to work when I can. I think that is why it has worked for my colleagues because most of them have children and they can adapt work to their availability.

**Ana**: How did the pandemic affect your work? Did you have to change any policies? Did it affect your sense of security?

**Marve**: The pandemic hit us all like a bucket of water. Unfortunately, our residential cleaning service was non-essential. People stayed at their house and we couldn’t go clean. The application was closed for three or four months. Some people had to stay home.

We started to develop commercial cleaning, which was front-line and it was not closed. Also move-out cleaning. And we also started doing disinfection cleaning.

We had to develop a safety policy for the clients and for ourselves. You have to go to a place and you have to go in your mask, with goggles, with special clothes that you take off when you leave.

We took time to prepare, learn how to do it. Almost everything has been via Zoom because we can no longer meet in person. We had to adapt to the videoconference because before everything was face-to-face.

Even the technology in the Up & Go application had to change—to be able to send messages to customers telling them that because of Covid we cannot serve them, we hope they are well, and that kind of thing.

**Ana**: If you hadn’t had the cooperative during the pandemic, how would have things been for you?

**Marve**: Since we are a cooperative organization, member of some other organizations, there were resources. I get emotional, because there are people who were totally stranded, and thanks to belonging to a cooperative, other organizations supported us. They were able to give us food, money, vouchers to buy food.

All of that has been a great help. If we hadn’t been in the cooperative, I don’t know how we would have fared.

We find financial support, and also moral support because we meet every 15 days via Zoom and we talk and find space to be. The workshops were key to keeping us busy.

For those with children, it has been doubly difficult. You attend the meeting and also homeschool. But I think that for most of us, we all agree that belonging to a cooperative has been a great help. In all aspects.

I have been fortunate to have the opportunity to see my colleagues, to do some paperwork, at a distance, but see each other. That makes our ties stronger, to have seen them, and to have been able to tell them don’t worry, we are here, we are going to get through this and there are people who are helping us.

**Ana**: Have you started doing residential cleaning again?

**Marve**: Yes, in July.

**Ana**: You mentioned before some values of Up & Go: security, trust, responsibility. These values, have they helped you during the pandemic?

**Marve**: Sometimes when you are in a normal situation, you see your principles, but you don’t feel them so much. In the pandemic, those values were strengthened — trust, responsibility. Because we begin to understand that we have a responsibility to take care of ourselves, to follow the rules, to grow and learn.

There are many things that we didn’t believe would ever happen, and now that all this has happened, there is more solidarity.

I had an experience on Thanksgiving when they were asking for volunteers to give food. I always had wanted to do it, but it is working as a cooperative member that strengthened me, pushed me to do it. I sent messages to my colleagues, come here today. Having this network has strengthened us, to say look, don’t worry, you can do this, you can do that, look for this resource, look for the other.

Sometimes, when suddenly we don’t hear from a colleague, anyone can say I’m going to call so-and-so to find out how she is. We are all indirectly or directly learning from this organization. We did not come to conquer, we just wanted to work and survive. But all this has taught us that we can aspire to have a different quality of life and to be able to live in a different way. And that’s amazing.

I get emotional about all this. I’ve lived it with my colleagues. It is incredible.

**Ana**: You are also the ones who created it.

**Marve**: Yes, exactly.

**Ana**: Is there anything else you want to say?

**Marve**: Cooperativism is a different world. It helps us as individuals and as a community, to bring a better quality of life to our community, to our family.

Now we know that we can achieve certain goals and standardize this so that we all benefit, without having to exploit others, without having to endure humiliation and other things that sometimes happen because of the need to work.

The cooperative world gives a lot, and we continue growing. I think one day we will be able to say that we have something fairer for each individual. I hope it reaches the whole world.

{% include image.html file='vol-3-issue-9-header-sp.jpg' alt='Una foto de Marve y una cita, Todo esto nos ha enseñado que podemos aspirar a una calidad de vida diferente, y a poder vivir de una manera diferente.' caption='Marve y otras trabajadoras del hogar aumentaron sus ventajas cooperativas en medio de COVID.' source_link=null half_width=false %}

**Ana Ulin**: Cuénteme sobre usted. ¿De dónde es? ¿A qué se dedicaba usted antes de Up & Go?

**Marve Romero**: Mi nombre es María Verónica Romero Hernández, “Marve”. Tengo 48 años, y 14 años viviendo en Nueva York. Soy de México, nací en Veracruz, pero crecí en la Ciudad de México y después en el estado de México. En México yo era vendedora de calzado por catálogo.

Vine a California en el 95, donde nació mi hijo. Después de dos años me lo llevé a México, para estar con mi familia. No pensé que iba a volver a los E.E.U.U., pero la situación en México es más dura. Los E.E.U.U. me ofrecía un horario de trabajo más flexible, y mi ex marido tenía familia en Nueva York. Necesitábamos dinero, así que empecé a trabajar en una lavandería, a pesar de que mi marido quería que me dedicara al niño.

**Ana**: ¿Cómo empezó a trabajar con Up & Go?

**Marve**: A los siete meses de haber llegado aquí, yo sufría violencia psicológica. En México sería nada, a la abuela le daban golpes, a ti no te dan golpes, aguántate. Mi ex marido estaba enojado porque empecé a trabajar en la lavandería, part-time. Él me vigilaba. Y un día él me dijo que me tenía que ir, y tuve que salir de la casa.

Yo tengo un hermano aquí, y él me apoyó. Estuve viviendo con mi hijo 8 años en un basement. En la corte yo fui a pedir la custodia, pero me decían que la violencia psicológica era difícil de comprobar, entonces me quedé quieta.

Trabajé en la oficina de un abogado. El abogado me preguntó por mi situación y le expliqué: yo vine de México, mi hijo nació aquí. Empezó a revisar mi caso, me dijo que yo había sufrido violencia doméstica. Fuimos a corte, me ayudó con los trámites.

Más tarde, en un evento de danza, conocí a las promotoras de VIP, una organización para la prevención de la violencia doméstica. Les llamé y me ayudaron.

Después de que terminé mi tiempo en VIP, nos dijeron que iba a haber una reunión informativa para formar parte de una cooperativa. Nos enseñaron cómo hacer los trámites y dar de alta una cooperativa, East Harlem Cleaning, con la que nos hicimos de la franquicia Brightly, que es una red de cooperativas de limpieza. Como cooperativa Brightly entramos a formar parte de Up & Go, tras un tiempo de aprobación con Up & Go. Entramos a Up & Go cuando eran tres cooperativas.

**Ana**: Cuénteme sobre la estructura de Up & Go.

**Marve**: Es una cooperativa de cooperativas de limpieza. La base somos los miembros. En nuestra cooperativa somos 12. Tomamos decisiones y formamos políticas.

Up & Go tienen estructurado todo tecnológicamente, es un app. Ellos trabajan con otras cooperativas, que es uno de los siete principios del cooperativismo.

Cada cooperativa manda dos representantes, y tiene su política de escoger a representantes para Up & Go. Cada tres semanas tenemos reuniones de membresía de Up & Go. Hay una junta directiva, que son tres representantes de tres cooperativas, y dos personas externas.

Tenemos el apoyo de CFL, el Centro de la Vida Familiar. Nos apoyan con la tecnología, con el márketing, con los fondos y también con el lugar donde podemos reunirnos.

**Ana**: Usted mencionó que es parte de Brightly, que a su vez pertenece a Up & Go. ¿Cómo funciona Brightly?

**Marve**: Brightly es una franquicia. Tiene su marca, y un estándar de calidad de servicios. Y también es una cooperativa.

Tenemos representantes que se reúnen para poder desarrollar cambios. A veces se necesita una votación para tomar una decisión. Cada cooperativa elige a sus representantes, de acuerdo muchas veces a la disponibilidad.

**Ana**: Son ustedes no sólo trabajadoras-dueñas, sino también empresarias, han fundado una empresa todas juntas. Eso requiere muy buenas relaciones personales, y mucha confianza. ¿Cómo crearon esas relaciones?

**Marve**: Con el apoyo de CFL, que son desarrolladores de cooperativas. Nos conocimos en un retiro de fin de semana.

Llegas a un lugar con gente desconocida, con una idea de que es un negocio donde tú vas a ser dueña y trabajadora a la vez, pero nada más. Nos empezamos a conocer, a nuestras compañeras y a nosotras mismas.

Hay hombres también en todo este desarrollo, pero hay muchas mujeres, que es algo muy positivo para nosotras, para decir, Ok, nos sentimos cómodas, y podemos hacerlo.

Hemos tenido momentos, donde yo dije, ya no puedo más, es muy largo, ¿cuándo vamos a empezar a trabajar? Ahora me doy cuenta de todo lo que hemos caminado y todo lo que hemos aprendido.

Es como ir a la escuela. Nos ha abierto a cosas diferentes, a conocernos a nosotras mismas, a saber de relaciones personales, de tecnología, de márketing, de contabilidad, de muchas cosas de las que no sabíamos nada como empleados.

Eso ha sido también un reto, cambiarnos ese chip. Eres empleada, pero también eres dueña y tienes en tus manos el poder de decidir.

Y nos seguimos conociendo. A pesar de que nos queremos mucho, las que estamos actualmente hemos resistido, porque es también una resistencia.
Hemos aprendido de nuestras guías, de las mujeres que nos han estado enseñando, y de mis compañeros.

No se trataba de que alguien ganara, se trata de que aprendamos, de que podamos encajar. Nos saca de nuestra zona de confort. Aquí es cambiarnos la mentalidad y decir que tú tienes el control de esto, pero también tienes esta responsabilidad.

Es algo que siempre deseé, porque antes yo pensaba en hacer una compañía de limpieza. Pero ahora lo sé, no es sólo, vamos a juntarnos y vamos. Si no tenemos una estructura, una política, una manera de llevar las cosas, se va a disolver fácilmente, porque no tenemos las herramientas.

Yo creo que el universo me puso donde yo desee estar.

**Ana**: ¿Cómo es trabajar para Up & Go, comparado con el trabajo que hacía antes?

**Marve**: Es un salario más justo. A veces no te quieren pagar porque dicen, hay otra persona que me cobra menos. Tienes que bajarte el precio. Hay mucho abuso y mucho robo de salario. Trabajar en Up & Go es una seguridad de que se trabaja con lo justo.

Por tu cuenta, consigues un cliente y vas a limpiar su casa por un año y de repente te dice me voy a mudar la siguiente semana y te quedas sin nada. Hay veces que tenía mucho trabajo y a veces llegué a no tener nada. La diferencia de trabajar en Up & Go es que estamos haciendo márketing, buscando la promoción, la publicidad.

Si un cliente, cuando trabajaba por mi cuenta, cancelaba de la noche a la mañana, no tenía nada que me pudiera apoyar. En Up & Go hay políticas para ellos, y hay políticas para nosotros. Si usted me cancela dentro de tantas horas va a tener que pagar un porcentaje. Encontramos en Up & Go los derechos como trabajadoras, que muchas veces creemos que por ser trabajadoras domésticas no los tenemos.

Trabajar en Up & Go me da la ventaja de poder trabajar en el tiempo que yo puedo. Yo creo que por eso ha funcionado con mis compañeras, porque la mayoría tienen niños y ellas pueden amoldar el trabajo a su tiempo.

**Ana**: ¿Cómo afectó la pandemia su trabajo? ¿Tuvieron que cambiar alguna política? ¿Afectó su sentido de seguridad?

**Marve**: La pandemia nos cayó a todos como un balde de agua. Lamentablemente, nuestro servicio de limpieza residencial cayó en lo no esencial. La gente se quedó en su casa y no podíamos ir a limpiar. Se cerró la aplicación tres o cuatro meses. Algunas personas se tuvieron que quedar en casa.

Empezamos a desarrollar la limpieza comercial, que era de primera línea, y no se cerró. También las limpiezas de mudanzas. Y también empezamos a hacer limpieza de desinfección.

Tuvimos que desarrollar una política de seguridad para los clientes y para nosotras. Tienes que ir a un lugar y tienes que ir con tu cubrebocas, con gafas, con ropa especial que te quitas cuando salgas de ahí.

Tomamos tiempo para prepararnos, aprender como hacerlo. Casi todo ha sido por via Zoom, porque ya no nos podemos reunir. Tuvimos que adaptarnos a la videoconferencia, aunque antes todo era presencial.

Incluso la tecnología en la aplicación de Up & Go tuvo que cambiar, para poder mandar mensajes a los clientes diciéndoles que por el Covid no podemos atenderles, esperamos que estén bien, y todo ese tipo de cositas.

**Ana**: ¿Si no hubiese tenido la cooperativa, durante tiempos de pandemia, como habrían sido las cosas para usted?

**Marve**: Por ser una organización cooperativa, miembro de algunas otras organizaciones, hubo fondos. Me da la emoción, porque hay gente que se quedó totalmente varada, y que gracias a pertenecer a una cooperativa, otras organizaciones nos apoyaron. Nos pudieron dar comida, dinero, vouchers para comprar comida.

Todo eso ha sido de gran ayuda. De no haber estado nosotros en la cooperativa, no sé como nos hubiera ido.

Encontramos el apoyo económico, y también el apoyo moral, porque nos reunimos cada 15 días vía Zoom y hablamos y encontramos un espacio donde estar. Los talleres fueron una clave para que nos mantuviéramos ocupadas.

Para las que tienen niños, ha sido doblemente difícil. Atiendes la reunión y la escuelita en la casa. Pero creo que para la mayoría todas coincidimos que ha sido una gran ayuda pertenecer a una cooperativa. En todos los aspectos.

He tenido la fortuna de tener la posibilidad de ver a mis compañeras para hacer un trámite, a distancia, pero vernos. Eso hace nuestros lazos más fuertes, poder haberlas visto a ellas, y poderles decir, no te preocupes, estamos aquí, vamos a salir adelante y hay gente que nos está ayudando.

**Ana**: ¿Con el paso del tiempo, han vuelto a empezar a hacer limpiezas residenciales?

**Marve**: Sí, en julio.

**Ana**: Usted ha mencionado antes algunos valores de Up & Go: seguridad, confianza, responsabilidad. Estos valores, ¿les han ayudado durante la pandemia?

**Marve**: A veces cuando estás en una situación normal pues ves tus principios, pero no se sienten tanto. En la pandemia esos valores se fortalecieron, la confianza, la responsabilidad. Porque empezamos a entender que tenemos una responsabilidad de cuidarte, de seguir las reglas, de desarrollarte y aprender.

Y yo creo que es a nivel general. Hay muchas cosas que no creíamos que iban a pasar nunca, y ahora que ha pasado todo esto, somos más solidarios.

Tuve una experiencia en Thanksgiving, cuando estaban solicitando voluntarios para dar comida. Siempre lo quise hacer, pero es trabar como cooperativista lo que me fortaleció, me empujó a hacerlo. Mandé mensajes a mis compañeras, vengan aquí hoy. Nos ha fortalecido el tener esta red, el decir mira, no te preocupes, puedes hacer esto, puedes hacer lo otro, busca este recurso, busca el otro.

A veces, cuando a una de mis compañeras si de repente no la escuchamos, cualquiera avisa voy a llamar a fulana, para saber como está. Todos lo venimos indirectamente o directamente aprendiendo de esta organización. Nosotros no veníamos a conquistar, sólo queríamos trabajar y sobrevivir. Pero todo esto nos ha enseñado que podemos aspirar a tener otra calidad de vida y a poder vivir de otra manera. Y eso definitivamente es grandioso.

Me emociona todo esto. Lo he vivido con mis compañeras. Es increíble.

**Ana**: También son las que lo han creado.

**Marve**: Sí, exacto.

**Ana**: ¿Hay alguna otra cosa que quiera mencionar?

**Marve**: El cooperativismo es un mundo aparte. Nos ayuda como seres individuales y como comunidad, a traer a nuestra comunidad mejor calidad de vida, a nuestra familia.

Ahora sabemos que podemos alcanzar unas metas y estandarizar esto de manera que todos salgamos beneficiados, sin tener que estar explotando a otras personas, sin tener que estar soportando humillaciones y cosas que se dan a veces por la necesidad de trabajar.

El mundo cooperativo da para mucho, y seguimos desarrollándonos. Creo que algún día podremos decir que tenemos algo más justo para cada individuo. Ojalá que llegue a todo el mundo.
